# Neonatal Sepsis Detection Using Decision Tree Ensemble Methods Random Forest and XGBoost

Neonatal sepsis is a potentially fatal medical condition due to an infection and is attributed to about 200 000 annual deaths globally. With healthcare systems that are facing constant challenges, there exists a potential for introducing machine learning models as a diagnostic tool that can be automatized within existing workflows and would not entail more work for healthcare personnel.
The Herlenius Research Team at Karolinska Institutet has collected neonatal sepsis data that has been used for the development of many machine learning models across several papers. However, none have tried to study decision tree ensemble methods. In this paper, random forest and XGBoost models are developed and evaluated in order to assess their feasibility for clinical practice. The data contained $24$ features of vital parameters that are easily collected through a patient monitoring system. The validation and evaluation procedure needed special consideration due to the data being grouped based on patient level and being imbalanced. The proposed methods developed in this paper have the potential to be generalized to other similar applications. Finally, using the measure receiver-operating-characteristic area-under-curve (ROC AUC), both models achieved around ROC AUC$=0.84$. Such results suggest that the random forest and XGBoost models are potentially feasible for clinical practice. Another gained insight was that both models seemed to perform better with simpler models, suggesting that future work could create a more explainable model.
